---
_edit_last: "1"
_jd_tweet_this: "yes"
_publicize_facebook_user: https://www.facebook.com/sch3lp
_wpcom_is_markdown: "1"
author: admin
categories:
  - uncategorized
date: "2018-06-18T10:18:42+00:00"
draft: "true"
guid: http://www.smpaget.com/blog/?p=3026
parent_post_id: null
post_id: "3026"
title: Article - "Are we doing  young people a service or disservice? and does local church youth ministry work" MeTheology in Scotland vol 24 issue 2
url: /blog/
---

_This article comes in the middle of talks from a special conference Exploring Mission in Scotland Today. Each of the presenters published they're talk, Alison presented about Distant voices, Dave presented on Hot Chocolate, but Pam Mellstrom presented on church youth work. I wasn't in the room so I am only reflecting on the written page, not the presentation or discussion on it._ _"[Are we doing young people a service or disservice? and does local church youth ministry work](https://ojs.st-andrews.ac.uk/index.php/TIS/article/view/1584)" Pam Mellstrom, 2017, Theology in Scotland, vol 24 issue 2_
In this article Mellstrom asks a number of questions around church work with young people both in outreach and within worship family. Central to her questions are the concept of success, (Is what we are doing at the moment working? If not then we need to question this approach.)
_Description of article._
Mellstrom indicates the work that churches do with young people is providing a service to those young people (p63). In this way, each church uses works with youth people in a similar way to a community service such as a baptism or a funeral. The use of youth work is intentional, deployed as a tool for church retention and growth. From this viewpoint Mellstrom asks if they provide a good service for young people or not? For Mellstrom this question is answered by the purpose the church embodies as they think about the work with young people they fund (p63). Pointing to retention and growth as unwritten expectations placed upon workers by churches (p66-7).
Mellstrom goes on to discuss those who grow up in church communities. Mellstrom finds that they find it hard to be effective in communities, provoking the question, does church based youth work know what it means to be a young person? Does the church insulate these young people from risk (p66)? She does this in relation the churches motivations and the parental pressure applied to the youth work of the church. (Parents are viewed as not wanting to see their young person drinking to excess, taking drugs, getting pregnant, etc.) (p67). The answer to the question of the churches work with young people is to do something different to what we are currently doing. Mellstrom is advocating a wholesale radical change around how churches think about work with young people.
Her view in formed by 15 years working within Linlithgow Young People Project (LYPP), an ecumenical venture with the expressed movitivation to do something for the young people of the town (p64). Her view of theology comes from how faith is practically experienced on the ground. The LYPP project development over 25 years, including an early focus on Youth Justice, developing into a Drop in community centre, a youth centre, mentoring group work and activities including outdoor education (p64). The project was intended to be a partnership with the local community, and they were successful in partnering with the local community but workers found within their relationships it was hard to be authentic (p64). They committed a hard and deliberate process of involving the local churches in the project and resulted in some young people being active members of the church life (p65). As a part of a long term, expect nothing process, some hard fought church growth can be achieved. Success is never defined for churches or for Christian youth work but a strong relationship between community and church is seen as integral to the success of LYPP (p64).
_Discussion of article._
Mellstrom’s analysis come from seeing church and community as two distinct cultures and the need to bridge between both cultures (p64). This was true several years ago, (see Pete Wards 1996 Growing up Evangelical), but it is still true of today? I don't buy this as a starting point. By saying the church life (religious life) is a different culture from the community (real life), we start from the position that they are divided in practice, and that uniting them is hard work only to be done by trained professionals. When in reality every person lives both every minute of every day, we all shop in same shops, live in the same place, go to the same school sports days. If we are already living in both worlds, how does our understanding of faith and its effects change? If a church employs a youth worker to work predominately within the church is that wrong?
Mellstrom is right to say youth work cannot be used as a quick fix to drive up retention and church growth. I am within a denomination, (the Church of Scotland), that has worries about numbers of members, the suspicion is that churches invest in work with young people expecting the work with young people to shore up their membership numbers (retention) or to add new youth to their ranks (growth). The missing generation of 20-30 year olds is a sign the churches existing view of work with young people isn't working (p67).
But here Mellstrom keeps youth work within the church growth agenda, the same issue she critiques. The argument that is put forward is that a different youth work, different to what we do now, will be successful. Success is never defined definitively in the article, but success seems viewed as a partnership between church and community which can be measured in church growth or mission. The example given of LYPPis ultimately a story which ends up in church growth, this reading misses out the years of hard work to get to that point and church growth was not the primary driver of church's decision to set up the LYPP. This keeps the issue of church growth at the heart of a focus on mission. Two points are worth thinking about here.  
1 - If work with young people is about being authentic (place holding is Andrew Roots term) with young people both in the community and in church, not accumulating young people to the church, can an argument for youth work success be made on church growth grounds?
2 - Is church growth for the Church of Scotland achievable? Perhaps the church universal will grow but perhaps the specific denomination will slowly come to an end, perhaps what we have just now is all we will have, and the Church of Scotland as an institution will not experience anymore growth.
Mellstrom further critiques the way churches do youth work and whether churches allow each young person to risk and experiment during adolescence. This views the young person as incomplete if they do not risk or try different indentities. Christian culture is viewed as safe and governed by moderation. To be athentically a young person is to do try these things and some value is asciribed to a period of trying out (p . And the lack of impact within the community is put down to a lack of taking risks as young person. This sets up the risk taking of identity choices as valuable. But this is a false dichotomy, as the perceived safety of churches isn’t really there. How does Christianity call a young person to risk, and does that choice mean you are less impactful in your community? If you are raised in the church a variety of outcomes and ways of living is possible, as seem to be true for a number of young people I have worked with.
_Further Questions._
If youth work in each place is a contextual answer. Are there any universal principles which would indicate good youth work in church contexts?
Where does our theological understanding of work with young people align with youth works understandings and where do they diverge?
